In this video we'll learn about pointer arithmetic and C++ and C++ pointers can be used in assignment
expressions arithmetic expressions and comparison expressions.
C++ allows a subset of the arithmetic operators to work with pointer variables pointer arithmetic operators
only makes sense when you use them with raw arrays but they're a very powerful way to manipulate them.
Let's start by looking at the increment and decrement operators in the context of pointers.
The increment operator increments the address stored in a pointer variable so that it points to the
next element in contiguous memory.
So if integer pointer is currently pointing tragics 1000 then integer pointer plus plus will increment
by the size of whatever it's pointing to.
In this case an integer.
It's for my machine.
So now we will point to one for in the case of a double.
It would be larger if a pointer is pointing to the address of a very large data type.
Then the increment operator would increment it by whatever the size of that large data type is the decrement
operator works exactly the same way except that it decrements the value stored in the pointer variable.
We can also use the addition and subtraction operators with pointers the addition operator determines
the operand on the right hand side of the expression and multiplies that number by the size of the element.
And that's what's being added to the pointer.
So adding 2 to an integer pointer increments the pointer by two times the size of an integer obviously
pointer arithmetic is machine specific since the size of C++ types vary from machine to machine.
The subtraction operator works in the same way except that we're decrementing the pointer's value.
What do you think is the result of subtracting one pointer from another while if both pointers point
to the same data type then the result will be the number of elements between the two pointers.
If the pointers point to different data types then you'll get a compiler.
Finally let's see how we can compare pointers.
We can compare pointers with the equality operators if we want to compare two pointers.
We can simply compare them using the equal or not equal operators.
But be aware that this will compare the values of the pointer variables.
So if the pointer is pointing to the same address then they're considered equal otherwise they're considered
not equal.
The data that they're pointing to is not considered when checking for equality.
The sample code shows an example of comparing pointers.
In this example P1 and P2 point two different addresses and P1 and three point to the same address.
So you can see that if we compare P1 and P2 we get back false.
And if we compare P1 and P3 we get back true all three pointers point to strings with de-value Frank
but that's not considered when you want to compare pointers.
So how do you compare what the pointers are pointing to.
Simple.
Just follow the pointers dereference them and then check what they're pointing to a shining example
next.
Here we have the same example except that we're dereferencing the pointer before we're comparing them.
So in this case P1 and P2 point two different strings but those strings both happen to be frank.
So this will display true P 1 in P3 point to the same string which is Frank.
So this will also display true.
So that's an intro to pointer arithmetic.
Let's head over to the ID and I'll show you some more examples.
Ok so I mean the idea and I'm the section 12 workspace in the pointer arithmetic project.
So let's go over a couple of examples of pointer arithmetic.
You can see here that I've got a score's array which is an array of integers and I've initialized to
195 89 68 and negative when I'm using the negative one is a cental because what I want to do is as I
want to loop through this array and when I see negative 1 I want to stop.
OK.
So I also have and this is called scores cinéma.
This array here then I've got my score pointer and I'm initialising to score.
So right now it's pointing right here.
Let's say that this is address a thousand of those four thousand eight we'll use decimal here and 12
and 2016 assuming four byte integers here.
Okay perfect.
So now let's loop through this array using the pointer.
OK so what I'm doing here is I'm dereferencing score pointers so follow the pointer to where it's pointing.
And then I'm checking the value at that location to be negative 1.
So I want to loop while it's not equal to negative 1 so I want to loop through this here once I see
negative 1.
I want to stop.
OK.
So that's what's going to happen here.
So score pointer right now is pointing to memory location 1000.
I'm going to dereference that.
I've got my hundred.
It's definitely not equal to minus 1.
So what am I going to display.
I'm not displaying score points because that would display a thousand.
I'm dereference the score pointer and that's despite the hundred.
Now we get into the pointer arithmetic.
What we're saying is score pointer plus plus In other words increment the score pointer.
Well what do we increment by we're correcting it by whatever it's pointing to when this case by 4 because
I've got four byte integers so this will no longer point here.
It'll now point here we go back up to the loop we checked to see if we're pointing to minus 1 we're
not.
And we display our dereferenced pointer which is now 95 again we point to the next one.
Now we're points 1000 eight.
It's not minus 1 so I'm going to display that 89.
I'm going to increment my pointer again.
Now I'm pointing to address a thousand twelve which is again not a minus one.
I'm going to display the 68 and I'm going to increment my pointer for the last time right here.
I check to see that my pointer is not pointing to minus 1 Well it is in this case my dereferenced pointer.
So I stop.
So this is the way you can loop through an array using a pointer and a sentinel value in this case.
This is called a sentinel value and this is commonly used as a terminator basically.
So you keep looping until you hit a Terminator.
OK so let me clear this and let's run this.
And we should see the array elements display and there are one hundred ninety five eighty 89 and 68
there is are four elements.
We don't display minus one because that is our sentinel.
OK so that's a simple example of pointer arithmetic.
Now let me show you another way to do this.
It's commonly seen.
OK.
So it's everything is exactly the same except that you'll notice right here in the previous example
we had two lines of code one dereference the pointer right here and then the other one increment to
the pointer to point to the next integer in the array.
Here we're doing it all in one.
So we've got this piece of code right here.
So we're saying dereferenced score pointer and increment so there's a lot going on here and it's important
to understand what's going on.
First of all we have two operators.
So the first thing we do is we look in the precedence chart to see which one has precedence.
Well they both have the same precedence.
So in this case what we do is we look at the associativity the associativity is right to left.
So what that means is that I'm incrementing a score pointer.
So I'm incrementing the pointer I'm not incrementing the what is pointing to if I had something like
this
that's real different now right because what I'm doing here is I'm dereferencing the pointer so I'm
getting the image or it's pointing to and then I'm incrementing that integer but that's not what we're
doing here.
In this case what we're doing is we're dereferencing the pointer and we're incrementing the pointer
after we use it.
While the use is right here the use is basically dereference the pointer and then increment the pointer.
So that's exactly what we're doing here right.
We're doing dereference a pointer and then increment the pointer.
But this you see a lot in C++ code you dereference and an increment or decrement if you want to go the
other way.
If we run this example and we clear this real quick if we run this example you'll see that we get exactly
the same output.
One hundred ninety five eighty nine 68 exactly the same thing.
OK I just wanted to show you that style because you tend to see this sort of style a lot out there.
OK so now let's do another example.
We scroll up just a little bit and let's see how we can compare pointers in this example.
So let's read about here and get a comment this code out.
Or I should say uncomment this code.
And let's go through this.
So here I've got three string objects as one as two as three.
So they're here as one as two and there's three as one points to a string Frank as to also a different
string Frank is the same frank but in a different memory location and as is James.
Now each one of these each one of these objects has a memory location associated with it right.
So let's say that this one is at a thousand.
This one is at 2000 and this one is at 3000 that way it's really easy to keep him straight.
Perfect.
Now here we go now we've got P1 is a pointer to a string so he can hold the addresses of strings that
those guys right here addresses of strings so we can assign any of them.
So let's do that.
So what is as one as one is the string object right here so we can assign the address of S1 to pee 1.
So P1 now has a thousand in it and there's my pointer.
P2 is the address of string to which is 2000 and there's my pointer to that one.
And now p 3 we're assigning the address of S1 again.
So there's the 1000 and P one P3 goes around this way we do it that way it's pointing there.
So now I'm using the blue as a modifier So we just print true and false solist do some comparisons here.
Does P1 equal P2 Well P1 is a thousand P2 is 2000.
So no they both points just strings who are frank but we're not considering what what they're pointing
to.
We're only considering the value of P1 and the value of P2 which are definitely different.
So we get back false.
How about this p one in P 3 will p what is a thousand and P three is a thousand.
So that's definitely true.
So I notice that were checking the pointer's value not what it's pointing to.
Now if we want to look to see if we're pointing to the same string then what we do is we dereference
the pointers here.
So you can see here this will output P1 right follow P1 so dereference P1 if you reference the one I
get Frank.
So this will say Frank compared to dereferenced P2 follow P2.
I get Frank again Frank is Frank that's true because now we're comparing the strings not the pointers.
Now over here we've got p p 3 p 133 both point to the same memory address so obviously what they're
pointing to is the same.
And in this case Frank is Frank also.
But now let's say we change P3 and we change the pointer and P3 2.2 3 the address of this guy right
here 3000.
So this is now 3000 were pointing here no longer pointing here.
Now what we're doing is we're comparing where dereferencing p 1 which points to Frank and we're de-brief
dereferencing p 3 which points to James.
So now what we're doing is we're complete We're comparing the string Franken to St. James which we get
back a false OK.
I know it's a lot of pointers to follow but it's pretty pretty clear once you really take your time
and walk through it.
So let's clear this and give this one a run.
And like I said you can play with this code.
She can see what's happening here.
Right this address and this address are not true.
Not the same.
So obviously those pointers are not the same in this case.
It is the same address.
So we have a true and then we're comparing Frank and Frank which is true Frank and Frank which is true
and Frank and James which is false in the bottom three examples here we're actually comparing the strings
not the pointers.
OK.
So let's do one more with subtraction.
You can see what that looks like and I'll uncomment all this out and we'll walk through this example.
This is a real simple example here.
In this case what have I got I've got name which is an array of characters right.
So I've got F R A N K and no character because this is a C-style string.
So I've got character pointer one.
It's a pointer to a character so I can point to any one of these guys here and I'm initialising that
to no pointer and then I've got character pointer to both no doubt.
OK so now what do I do I'm saying character pointer one is pointing to the address of named Sub-Zero
what's name Sub-Zero that f right there the address that I could have just said name it means exactly
the same thing.
But I wanted to do it a different way.
Could see.
So character pointer one is pointing here and character point or two is pointing to member 0 1 2 3 4
5.
In this case.
Right.
So it's pointing to the address of names of three which is the n right now assuming the characters are
one byte.
This would be a thousand.
This one would be at a Thousand One thousand two in 2003.
Right.
So this would be a thousand three.
And this would be 1000.
So when I subtract those two pointers like I'm doing right here it's subtracting thousand three from
a thousand.
And that's what I'm getting back.
There's three characters between those two pointers and that's all the point to subtraction means right.
So let's give this a run.
And the last example here says in the string Frank and is three characters away from F and that's exactly
what we expected.
OK so this gives you a little bit of a intro to pointer arithmetic you can see it's pretty straightforward.
Never think of adding one or adding to already three.
I always think about adding one of the type that I'm pointing to.
It could be 4 bytes 8 bytes 100 bytes depending on what I'm pointing to.